[JENKINS-60866] Add initial guidelines how to make code compatible with CSP (#5301)
jenkins-infra/jenkins.io: content/doc/developer/security/csp.adoc

Using Content-Security-Policy (CSP), injection attacks like cross-site scripting can be prevented.

// TODO Keep up to date with versions
Unfortunately, as of Jenkins 2.360, the Jenkins classic UI is not yet compatible with the CSP directives that would allow preventing such injection attacks.

This guide documents how to write UI code in a manner that is expected to be compatible with future use of CSP directives on the Jenkins UI.

== Guidelines

=== Inline JavaScript blocks

Do not use inline JavaScript (JS) on the Jenkins UI, i.e., JS embedded in HTML output.

This is typically done with `<script>` tags, like so:

[source, html]
<script type="text/javascript">
alert("Hello, world!");
</script>

The guidelines in link:/doc/developer/security/xss-prevention/#passing-values-to-javascript[the documentation on XSS prevention] can be useful to pass arguments to JavaScript, or otherwise control its behavior dynamically.

You can generally use https://github.com/jenkinsci/stapler/blob/master/docs/jelly-taglib-ref.adoc#adjunct[Stapler adjuncts] to load files related to UI views and ensure they are loaded only once.

> Exmples of this are: https://github.com/jenkinsci/jenkins/pull/6849[jenkinsci/jenkins#6849]

Reviewer: Maybe you are planning on adding more examples, but if not, I might reword this to "An example of this is: ". (Same for below.)

Author: ```suggestion
An example of this is https://github.com/jenkinsci/jenkins/pull/6849[jenkinsci/jenkins#6849].
```

=== Inline event handlers

> Event handlers like `onclick` or `onblur` would be defined in separate files.

Reviewer: I would make this prescriptive to match the intro to the first section and last section in "Guidelines".

```suggestion
Event handlers like `onclick` or `onblur` should be defined in separate files.
```

> For this to work, the element that would have the inline event handler attribute(s) would need a class or ID by which it can be looked up from JS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this to work, the element that would have had the inline event handler attribute(s) needs a class or ID by which it can be looked up from JS.
```

> Depending on how that element is added to the UI, you'd use on the the following methods to add event handlers:

Reviewer: typo I think

```suggestion
Depending on how that element is added to the UI, you'd use one of the following methods to add event handlers:
```

> You can use `document.addEventListener('DOMContentLoaded', …)` when it's one or more elements that are present on the page from the moment it is loaded.

Reviewer: nit: Unclear to me what `it's` is referring to.

```suggestion
You can use `document.addEventListener('DOMContentLoaded', …)` for one or more elements that are present on the page from the moment it is loaded.
```

Look up the elements by their ID or class or similar characteristics, then call `#addEventListener` on them.
Be mindful of Jenkins's extensibility, so consider including plugin names in element class names or IDs to prevent unintentional conflicts with other plugins.

Use `Behaviour#specify` to add event handlers to elements that may be dynamically added to the page, for example as part of AJAX responses.
One common instance of this is in configuration forms: `renderOnDemand` is used by common form elements like `hetero-list` to load parts of the page only as the form is being changed.
The code that adds content from AJAX responses dynamically to the page needs to call `Behaviour#applySubtree` on the newly added content.

Examples of this are: https://github.com/jenkinsci/jenkins/pull/5514[jenkinsci/jenkins#5514]

=== Legacy JavaScript `checkUrl` validation

> Form validation using manually specified `checkUrl` parameters currently supports inline JS for its "legacy" mode.

Reviewer: I would make this prescriptive to match the first and last section in "Guidelines":

```suggestion
Do not use "legacy" mode form validation, which supports inline JS with manually specified `checkUrl` parameters.
```

It looks like the following:

[source, html]
<f:textbox checkUrl="'${rootURL}/${h.jsStringEscape(it.url)}checkText?value='+encodeURIComponent(this.value)+'" … />

This combines inline JS and building parts of the string using JEXL expressions in Jelly, with different ways to escape different parts of the content to prevent injection vulnerabilities.

Instead, use the _modern_ `checkUrl` mode, which as of Jenkins 2.360 requires the `checkDependsOn` attribute to be set (but it can be an empty string).
This mode will automatically add the current form elements value as the query parameter called `value`, so the above examples can be simplified to the following:

[source, html]

> <f:textbox checkUrl="${rootURL}/${it.url}checkText" … />

Author: ```suggestion
<f:textbox checkUrl="${rootURL}/${it.url}checkText" checkDependsOn="" … />
```

Examples of this are: https://github.com/jenkinsci/jenkins/pull/6856[jenkinsci/jenkins#6856] https://github.com/jenkinsci/jenkins/pull/6857[jenkinsci/jenkins#6857]

To pass additional values, specify the respective form field names as part of the `checkDependsOn` string.

If you need to pass parameters that are not represented as form fields, the following options exist as of Jenkins 2.360:

* Define a new form validation endpoint.
  This can be a viable option when it's a boolean value (2 endpoints instead of one).
* Define a hidden form field (wrap it in `f:invisibleEntry`) with the expected `name` and `value` and specify it in `checkDependsOn`.
  Make sure to ignore it otherwise.
  See https://github.com/jenkinsci/jenkins/pull/6859[jenkinsci/jenkins#6859] for an example.

=== `eval` calls

`eval` should not be used to interpret a string as JS code.

Depending on your use case, different solutions are possible.

To parse JSON, use `JSON.parse` instead.
See https://github.com/jenkinsci/jenkins/pull/6868[jenkinsci/jenkins#6868] for an example.

> To invoke a callback, have the caller define a global function and pass its name as an argument.

Reviewer: Having to define globals seems awkward. Do you have an example of this case?

Author: `var foo = …;` (or `let foo = …;`) outside any block makes it global scoped.

Reviewer: Yeah, I just meant that the general scenario of when you would need to do this is not really clear to me.

Author: It's the part of https://github.com/jenkinsci/jenkins/pull/6865 related to `renderOnDemand.jelly`.

> Then your code can invoke like this:

Reviewer: I would add "the callback" or "it" here:

```suggestion
Then your code can invoke the callback like this:
```
